---
layout: post
title: "CC0 Spring 2021 Update"
date: 2021-01-17 22:55:00
tags: c0 cmu
---

For the upcoming spring semester, we have released another, smaller, update for 
CC0. 

## Changelog

### Compiler
 - Added source map generation
 - Removed `c0_push_callstack` and `c0_pop_callstack` from C code generation
   since it is now unnecessary
 - CC0 now exits with status 2 if `gcc` doesn't complete successfully for some reason
 - Fixed function pointer's interaction with contract wrapper functions

### C0VM
 - Bumped bytecode version to 11
 - Added the '`.bc1`' extension for C1 programs
 - Fixed bytecode having a higher local variable count than they actually had
 - Added the `addrof_static` and `addrof_native` instructions
 - Modified the rules for `invokedynamic` to account for new `addrof` instructions
 - CC0 will now refuse to compile a program to 32-bit bytecode 
   which uses `void*` pointers or function pointers. This is because
   those features exploit the fact that virtual addresses are only 48 bits
   long on 64-bit platforms, so we can use the upper 16 bits to store data.
 - Finalized C1 feature spec and implementation for C0VM (function pointers and `void*`)

### Libraries
 - The same issue that affected `parse_int` also affected `parse_ints`, so 
   `parse_ints` has been modified to re-use `parse_int` to ensure 
   consistent behavior
 - All runtimes and libraries are now compiled with `-O2`. This can have a 
   significant (positive) effect on performance, since some operations like
   pointer dereferencing and array subscripting are frequent and cannot be
   inlined or optimized since their implementation is in a dynamic library

### Runtime
 - Due to the removal of `c0_push_callstack`, modified stack overflow handling
   to handle `SIGSEGV` on an alternate stack
 - Significantly improved backtraces by using [`libbacktrace`](https://github.com/ianlancetaylor/libbacktrace)
   and the C0 source map.

### Other
 - Rewrote the [testing harness in Rust](https://github.com/ishantheperson/c0check) 
   to dramatically decrease testing times by running tests in parallel. 
   There are other enhancements as well. 

## Backtraces

As my experience with [15-410](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~410/) taught me,
backtraces are probably one of the most effective debugging tools we have.
Unfortunately, the previous implementation of backtraces in CC0 was not 
entirely complete. It was able to pinpoint which function a problem occured in,
but not where exactly in the function the problem happened. The reason for this
was because the previous implementation was written in around 30 minutes, and
worked by hijacking existing 'caller location' information which was inserted
as part of contracts. For example:

```c
int foo(int x) { return x + 4; }
int bar(int y)
//@requires y > 0;
//@ensures \result > 0;
{
    int z = 123;
    return 2 * foo(123);
}

int main() {
    return bar(123);
}
```

gets translated into something similar to: 

```c
int foo(int x, string caller) { 
  int return_value = x + 4;
  return return_value;
}

int bar(int y, string caller) {
    assert(y > 0, "@requires annotation failed, caller location: " + caller);

    int z = 123;
    int return_value = 2 * foo(123, "bar: 7.16-7.19");

    assert(return_value > 0, "@ensures annotation failed");
    return return_value;
}

int main() {
    return bar(123, "main: 11.12-11.15");
}
```

Then we can use this `caller` string with a pair of functions `c0_push_callstack()`
and `c0_pop_callstack` like this (using the abstract syntax for `assert` and `+` for `string_join`):

```c
int foo(int x, string caller) { 
  c0_push_callstack(caller);

  int return_value = x + 4;

  c0_pop_callstack();
  return return_value;
}

int bar(int y, string caller) {
    c0_push_callstack(caller);
    assert(y > 0, "@requires annotation failed, caller location: " + caller);

    int z = 123;
    int return_value = 2 * foo(123, "bar: 7.16-7.19");

    assert(return_value > 0, "@ensures annotation failed");

    c0_pop_callstack();
    return return_value;
}

int main() {
    return bar(123, "main: 11.12-11.15");
}
```

It's very simple, but isn't really what people expect from a backtrace.
If `foo` were more complicated, we wouldn't really know where in `foo` 
the problem occured. Furthermore, every function call requires us to 
invoke `c0_push_callstack`. So if we call a function inside a tight loop,
this hurts performance since we have to constantly push and pop from the callstack.

In order to solve this, we exploit the fact that there already exists an 
excellent library for performing backtraces on C programs. As C0 translates
quite directly to C, this already solves a large portion of the problem.
Once we have a backtrace for the C program, we just need to translate the 
C locations to C0 locations. We do this by embedding a source map into the binary.
For example, for the above program we generate this C program, with the 
corresponding source map at the bottom

```c
#include "cc0lib.h"
#include "c0rt.h"
#include "contracts.c0.h"

int _c0_foo(int _c0v_x, c0_string _c0t__caller) {
  int _c0t__result;
  _c0t__result = (_c0v_x + 4);
  return _c0t__result;
}

int _c0_bar(int _c0v_y, c0_string _c0t__caller) {
  int _c0t__result;
  cc0_assert((_c0v_y > 0), c0_string_join(c0_string_fromliteral("contracts.c0: 3.4-3.19: @requires annotation failed\n"), c0_string_join(_c0t__caller, c0_string_fromliteral(": caller location"))));
  int _c0v_z = 123;
  int _c0t__tmp_1 = _c0_foo(123, c0_string_fromliteral("bar (contracts.c0: 7.16-7.24)"));
  _c0t__result = (2 * _c0t__tmp_1);
  cc0_assert((_c0t__result > 0), c0_string_fromliteral("contracts.c0: 4.4-4.24: @ensures annotation failed"));
  return _c0t__result;
}

int _c0_main() {
  c0_string _c0t__caller = c0_string_fromliteral("(program start)");
  int _c0t__result;
  int _c0t__tmp_2 = _c0_bar(123, c0_string_fromliteral("main (contracts.c0: 11.12-11.20)"));
  _c0t__result = _c0t__tmp_2;
  return _c0t__result;
}
long map_length = 29;
const char* source_map[29] = {
  [13] = "contracts.c0: 3.4-3.19",
  [15] = "contracts.c0: 7.16-7.24",
  [17] = "contracts.c0: 4.4-4.24",
  [24] = "contracts.c0: 11.12-11.20"
};
```

We have the nice property that `source_map[i]` gives the C0 location of
line `i` of the C program (or `NULL` if no location information is available).
Then when printing out stack frames, we just print out the corresponding
C0 location. 

This also takes advantage of the fact that C0 has a well-defined order of evaluation.
For example

```c
int* p = NULL;
f(1 / 0, *p);
```
will always generate a division by 0 instead of a segfault. However, C does not
make any such guarantee. Therefore, C0 isolates potentially effectful expressions:

```c
int* p = NULL;
int tmp1 = 1 / 0;
int tmp2 = *p;
f(tmp1, tmp2);
```

This means that when translated to C, we only have one effectful computation
per line of C code. Since the only lines of code which can appear in a backtrace
are effectful statements (e.g. function call, dereference, array subscript, 
division/mod/shift, etc.), this means we will not have one line need multiple 
locations in C. 

Overall, this means that backtraces will now display the precise location
of the problem, as opposed to just which function went wrong. In addition,
since `libbacktrace` works by crawling the stack, this means that this feature has
0 performance overhead. This means that we also get backtraces when not compiling
with the `-d` option. 

## Function pointer/contract wrapper bug

C0 code is capable of calling C functions from dynamic libraries. In addition,
these functions can also have contracts attached to them. For example,

```c
int* parse_int(string s, int base)
/*@requires 2 <= base && base <= 36; @*/ ;
```

Although `parse_int` is implemented in C in `libparse.so`/`libparse.dylib`, 
we still need to generate a C0 'wrapper function' which checks the contract
for the base. So we get something like:

```c
int* parse_int__1(string s, int base, string caller) {
  assert(2 <= base && base <= 36, "@requires annotation failed: " + caller);
  return parse_int(s, base);
}
```

Note the extra `caller` argument which is used to provide an error message. 
The compiler replaces every use of `parse_int` with this wrapper `parse_int__1`.
For example

```c
typedef int* parse_fn(string s, int base);

int main() {
  parse_fn* f = &parse_int;
  return *(*f)("0x123", 16);
}
```

becomes 

```c
typedef int* parse_fn(string s, int base, string caller);

int main() {
  parse_fn* f = &parse_int__1;
  return *(*f)("0x123", 16, "main: 5.12-5.13");
}
```

The address-of target has been changed, and the function pointer invocation
has had the caller string inserted. Unfortunate, this causes problems if
a native function does not have contracts, such as `println`:

```c
void println(string msg);
```

In this case, no wrapper is generated. Notable, there is also no extra argument
for the caller. 

The compiler does not replace usages of `println` with a wrapper. 
But function pointer invocations still have the caller string inserted, since
the compiler cannot know whether `f` points to a function which accepts a caller string
or doesn't. For example:

```c
#use <conio>

typedef void u(string s);

int main() {
    u* f = &println;

    (*f)("hello world");

    int a = 2 + 2;
    return a;
}
```

This generates the following C code:

```c
int _c0_main() {
  c0_string _c0t__caller = c0_string_fromliteral("(none)");
  int _c0t__result;
  _c0_u* _c0v_f = &println;
  (cc0_deref(_c0_u, _c0v_f))(c0_string_fromliteral("hello world"), c0_string_fromliteral("fp.c1:18.5-18.24"));
  int _c0v_a = (2 + 2);
  _c0t__result = _c0v_a;
  return _c0t__result;
}
```

Note the extra argument to the function pointer invocation. Because of the
x86 and x86_64 calling convention, this never caused any issues for around 8 years. 
Unfortunately, when compiling to C0VM, this creates an issue because the extra 
caller argument would remain on the stack and interfere. 

Ultimately, we resolved this by creating a wrapper function for every native function.


## Upcoming changes

These changes didn't make it in time for Spring 2021, but should make it 
into the Summer or Fall 2021 release. 

### Compiler
 - Fix a race condition when running two instances of CC0 concurrently.
   For example:

   ```
   $ cc0 pixel-int.c0 pixel-test.c0 &
   $ cc0 pixel-array.c0 pixel-test.c0 &
   ```
   CC0 generates a temporary file
   with the name taken from the last file in the input sequence (e.g. `pixel-test.c0.c`).
   Unfortunately if concurrent invocations have the same 'last file', 
   then there is the following race condition:
 
   | CC0 #1                  | CC0 #2 |
   | ----------------------- | --------------- |
   | Generates `pixel-test.c0.c`      |                    |
   |                         | Generates `pixel-test.c0.c` |
   | Invokes `gcc` on `haz.c0.c` |               |
   | Deletes `pixel-test.c0.c`        |                 |
   |                           | Invokes `gcc` on `pixel-test.c0.c` |
   |                         | Error: `pixel-test.c0.c` doesn't exist |
   | Error: executable produces wrong answer | |


### C0VM
 - Change the native pool number of arguments to take 1 byte instead of 2.
   This is for consistency with bytecode ('static') functions

### Runtime
 - Disable threading support in the Boehm GC, since we don't use it.
   This also lets us use `SIGXCPU` to set fair timeouts for programs
   using `setrlimit` when testing, as the GC uses `SIGXCPU` for its own
   purposes when compiled with thread support

 - Potentially inline `c0_deref` and `c0_array_sub` by including their definitions
   in `c0rt.h`, depending on benchmark results.
